p8105_hw2_kmw2189.md, before:

Homework 2
================
Kylie Wheelock Riley
9/25/2019

# Problem 1

## Importing and cleaning Mr. Trash Wheel Data

``` r
library(readxl)
trash_wheel = read_excel(path = "./data/mr_trash_wheel_data_aug19.xlsx", 1) %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  rename(vol_y3 = volume_cubic_yards, cigs = cigarette_butts) %>% 
  select(-x15) %>% 
  drop_na(dumpster:date) %>%
  mutate(sports_balls = round(sports_balls, 0)) %>% 
  mutate(sports_balls = as.integer(sports_balls))
```

    ## New names:
    ## * `` -> ...15
    ## * `` -> ...16
    ## * `` -> ...17

## Importing and cleaning 2017 precipitation data

``` r
precip_2017 = read_excel(path = "./data/mr_trash_wheel_data_aug19.xlsx", 6, skip = 1) %>% 
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  rename(total_in = total) %>% 
    mutate(
    total_in = na_if(total_in, 0),
    year = "2017") %>% 
  drop_na(total_in, month) %>% 
  select(year, month, total_in)
```

## Importing and cleaning 2018 precipitation data

``` r
precip_2018 = read_excel(path = "./data/mr_trash_wheel_data_aug19.xlsx", 5, skip = 1) %>% 
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  rename(total_in = total) %>% 
  mutate(
    total_in = na_if(total_in, 0),
    year = "2018") %>% 
   drop_na(total_in, month) %>% 
  select(year, month, total_in)
```

## Joining 2017 and 2018 precipitation data

``` r
precip_bind = bind_rows(precip_2017, precip_2018) %>% 
  mutate(month = month.name[month])
```

Mr. Trash Wheel is a trash interceptor that removes trash as it enters
Baltimore’s Inner Harbor. Between May 2014 and August 2019 Mr.Trash
Wheel brought in a total of 344 dumpsters full of trash. The average
dumpster weighed 3.26 tons with a volume of 15.54 cubic yards. Trash
collected in the dumpsters included cigarette butts, plastic bottles,
sports balls, and grocery bags, among others. Mr. Trash Wheel is most
active just after a precipitation event. Between 2017 and 2018 there was
a total of 23 months with precipitation. 2017 had lower total
precipitation with 32.93 inches compared to a total of 70.33 inches in
2018. The median number of sports balls collected per dumpster in 2017
was 8 and the 2018 median was also 8.

# Problem 2

``` r
pols_month = read_csv(file = "./data/pols_month.csv") %>% 
  separate(mon, into = c("year", "month", "day"), sep = "-") %>% 
   mutate(
    month = as.numeric(month),
    month = month.name[month],
    ##using an if else statement with prez_gop variable to create new president variable 
    president = ifelse(prez_gop > 0, "gop", "dem")
    ) %>%
  select(-prez_dem, -prez_gop, -day)
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   mon = col_date(format = ""),
    ##   prez_gop = col_double(),
    ##   gov_gop = col_double(),
    ##   sen_gop = col_double(),
    ##   rep_gop = col_double(),
    ##   prez_dem = col_double(),
    ##   gov_dem = col_double(),
    ##   sen_dem = col_double(),
    ##   rep_dem = col_double()
    ## )

``` r
snp_data = read_csv(file = "./data/snp.csv") %>% 
  ##saving data as year, month, day, but it is written as month, day, year
  mutate( 
    date = as.Date(date)
    )
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   date = col_character(),
    ##   close = col_double()
    ## )

``` r
  ##separate(date, into = c("month", "day", "year"), sep = "/") 
```

Second, clean the data in snp.csv using a similar process to the above.
For consistency across datasets, arrange according to year and month,
and organize so that year and month are the leading columns.

Third, tidy the unemployment data so that it can be merged with the
previous datasets. This process will involve switching from “wide” to
“long” format; ensuring that key variables have the same name; and
ensuring that key variables take the same values.

Join the datasets by merging snp into pols, and merging unemployment
into the result.

Write a short paragraph about these datasets. Explain briefly what each
dataset contained, and describe the resulting dataset (e.g. give the
dimension, range of years, and names of key variables).

Commit message:

adding unemployment data, starting merge.

p8105_hw2_kmw2189.md, after:

Homework 2
================
Kylie Wheelock Riley
9/25/2019

# Problem 1

## Importing and cleaning Mr. Trash Wheel Data

``` r
library(readxl)
trash_wheel = read_excel(path = "./data/mr_trash_wheel_data_aug19.xlsx", 1) %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  rename(vol_y3 = volume_cubic_yards, cigs = cigarette_butts) %>% 
  select(-x15) %>% 
  drop_na(dumpster:date) %>%
  mutate(sports_balls = round(sports_balls, 0)) %>% 
  mutate(sports_balls = as.integer(sports_balls))
```

    ## New names:
    ## * `` -> ...15
    ## * `` -> ...16
    ## * `` -> ...17

## Importing and cleaning 2017 precipitation data

``` r
precip_2017 = read_excel(path = "./data/mr_trash_wheel_data_aug19.xlsx", 6, skip = 1) %>% 
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  rename(total_in = total) %>% 
    mutate(
    total_in = na_if(total_in, 0),
    year = "2017") %>% 
  drop_na(total_in, month) %>% 
  select(year, month, total_in)
```

## Importing and cleaning 2018 precipitation data

``` r
precip_2018 = read_excel(path = "./data/mr_trash_wheel_data_aug19.xlsx", 5, skip = 1) %>% 
  janitor::clean_names() %>% 
  rename(total_in = total) %>% 
  mutate(
    total_in = na_if(total_in, 0),
    year = "2018") %>% 
   drop_na(total_in, month) %>% 
  select(year, month, total_in)
```

## Joining 2017 and 2018 precipitation data

``` r
precip_bind = bind_rows(precip_2017, precip_2018) %>% 
  mutate(month = month.name[month])
```

Mr. Trash Wheel is a trash interceptor that removes trash as it enters
Baltimore’s Inner Harbor. Between May 2014 and August 2019 Mr.Trash
Wheel brought in a total of 344 dumpsters full of trash. The average
dumpster weighed 3.26 tons with a volume of 15.54 cubic yards. Trash
collected in the dumpsters included cigarette butts, plastic bottles,
sports balls, and grocery bags, among others. Mr. Trash Wheel is most
active just after a precipitation event. Between 2017 and 2018 there was
a total of 23 months with precipitation. 2017 had lower total
precipitation with 32.93 inches compared to a total of 70.33 inches in
2018. The median number of sports balls collected per dumpster in 2017
was 8 and the 2018 median was also 8.

# Problem 2

## Importing and tidying the monthly poll data

``` r
pols_month = read_csv(file = "./data/pols_month.csv") %>% 
  separate(mon, into = c("year", "month", "day"), sep = "-") %>% 
   mutate(
    month = as.numeric(month),
    month = month.name[month],
    ##using an if else statement with prez_gop variable to create new president variable 
    president = ifelse(prez_gop > 0, "gop", "dem")
    ) %>%
  select(-prez_dem, -prez_gop, -day)
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   mon = col_date(format = ""),
    ##   prez_gop = col_double(),
    ##   gov_gop = col_double(),
    ##   sen_gop = col_double(),
    ##   rep_gop = col_double(),
    ##   prez_dem = col_double(),
    ##   gov_dem = col_double(),
    ##   sen_dem = col_double(),
    ##   rep_dem = col_double()
    ## )

## Importing and tidying the S\&P data

``` r
snp_data = read_csv(file = "./data/snp.csv") %>% 
  ##saving data as year, month, day, but it is written as month, day, year
  mutate( 
    date = as.Date(date)
    )
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   date = col_character(),
    ##   close = col_double()
    ## )

``` r
  ##separate(date, into = c("month", "day", "year"), sep = "/") 
```

Second, clean the data in snp.csv using a similar process to the above.
For consistency across datasets, arrange according to year and month,
and organize so that year and month are the leading columns.

## Importing and tidying the unemployment dataset

Third, tidy the unemployment data so that it can be merged with the
previous datasets. This process will involve switching from “wide” to
“long” format; ensuring that key variables have the same name; and
ensuring that key variables take the same values.

Join the datasets by merging snp into pols, and merging unemployment
into the result.

Write a short paragraph about these datasets. Explain briefly what each
dataset contained, and describe the resulting dataset (e.g. give the
dimension, range of years, and names of key variables).
